There is really the rare burden, and you use a
different tape, you'll get one out. The rare
person that excels in all three, and I don't have
any quarrel at all with seeing those people
compensated as much as the university president,
because they are shining stars. I feel if you get
anybody that excels in any one of those three
areas, and they're not a kind of a problem in the
institution otherwise, you better keep them, and
I'd advise anybody that you better keep them, if
you can tell that they really do a great job in any
area. Chances are they're going to be at least
minimally involved in one of the others. So that's
my thought about it. All right, in this department
down through the years, as far as you're aware, Has
there really been a merit-reward system? In other
words, there have been merit increases which have
varied according to... And how were, do you have
any idea how those judgments were formulated? Was
it by... Pretty much by a personal system, that's
fair. It was by the department head, General?
Well, I'm sure the department head gets input from
others, but no, it's been a department head. And as
far as you're aware, how did this department's
rewards compare with the other major departments
in agriculture? Relatively? Fairly? Oh, I'd say,
you mean other departments here? Mm-hmm. Yeah. I
think, I think we're, in the bar, we have better, we
have better support dollars in this department.
Mm-hmm. And that's all I'm going to say. I think
almost all that was marsh blood work. Mm-hmm.
And... And I heard Harry Coughlin say one time,
people in soil and crop sciences have more
technicians than all the rest of the college put
together.
I guess that's true. If he said it, I suspect it was
true. And so, you know, during the whole run of
years, and we're getting other departments that
are getting pretty strong. Mm-hmm. Wildlife and
fisheries and agri-culture. Well, they all look
at soil and crop sciences. Being the... The one.
The one they want to be. So they, of course, they
think we're unjustly loaded, and the plain,
simple fact is, if you're going to do field work,
that's a whole different, that is a much different
thing than going to the lab, and it's way different
than going to the library. When you start doing
field work, that is, you talk about
labor-intensive work, it is, it is... It's as
costly as it can be. If we, during the 80s and 90s, if
we'd had a knowledgeable group of soil and crop
scholars nationally,
this department in general would be in the major
leagues nationally with what other schools?
Iowa State. All right. Minnesota. Did you say
Ohio? Iowa. Iowa. Iowa State. Minnesota.
Wisconsin. Wisconsin. Fort
Wayne-Davis.
Well, Illinois, although it's,
during the time we've been coming up, some have
been going down. I would put Cornell, but that's
everywhere. Or you didn't mention another school
in the South or Southwest? Well, I was debating
whether to mention North Carolina State or not. It
would probably be our closest peer in our
disciplinary areas in the South. I believe
anybody else would. So that you think a
knowledgeable group, if they were looking fairly
and evaluating, would put us in the top? Top ten.
Okay. That's the department, yeah. During the 70s
and 80s, did you and your colleagues feel that
agriculture was continuing to get a fair share of
the emphasis here on this campus? I
guess so. I think there's a feeling now that the
2020 vision was pretty warped. Oh, really? Yeah.
But agriculture got very little attention. Oh,
really? In the 2020s. And
I
take it as being, we're not trying to take away from
anybody, we're trying to build strength in some
areas where we don't have any strength. But I think
a lot of people in agriculture and engineering
didn't get the attention they deserved in the 2020
vision.
Things would be taken away, but
probably just not as much attention to it or it's
a problem. I don't know. I don't know what the
solution is. It's obvious that it's on the
government's committee, on the 2020 vision
thing. And there's quite a lot of interest in
getting the agencies under the president,
feeling that he can pit the chancellor against the
president. It goes to one. And, of course, Dr.
Eiler is a very honorable man. But at the same
time... I mean, he'll play his cards where he
thinks he'll play best. And I have some mixed
emotions about that whole thing myself and
looking at it. But the committee recommendation
was that we, and Perry Atkinson was a strong
supporter of getting the agencies, having the
agencies report through the president to the
chancellor. Oh, I didn't know that. That's in
2020. It's not in 2020. Oh, oh. It was in the
beginning. It didn't... Oh. It didn't see the
light of day. Oh, I see. I mean, it was obviously a
potato, hot potato wherever decisions are made
that they just decided it couldn't be dealt with.
Michael Hitt was chair of that committee. And, of
course, there are negotiations within the
committee. And I won't say it really received all
the attention it probably should have. Perry was
on the committee. So Perry is... obviously period
had a big impact and I think we have a real problem. I
think there's a problem. I think there needs to be
something done there. Maybe the system now is so
large that we won't play the game that we played
here for years. You know what the game was. And
obviously the chancellor then didn't have as much
clout as the president in most cases. Now do you
remember in the last 20 years or so any decision
affecting this department that got caught in the
situation where the campus was overruled by the
deputy chancellor for agriculture? Right
as of today, we have 49 faculty on campus and 49
faculty. Some of the orders
they
have to
do are
over 10. They're technologically responsible.
And presumably we have to coordinate the program.
Let's say we have a research program. We interact
a lot with the research and extension center
directors regarding those faculty. Would all 98
of those have faculty titles? Yeah. And they would
go... It's only in recent years that the extension
specialists have had faculty titles. So that...
That would go back about 10 years. Their promotion
would officially go through the department.
That's correct. Tenure? Well, tenure is only if
you have more than 25% university employment. Oh,
okay. The extension faculty do not... And if we
were to have an accountant to look at the
compensation, what is the major differences in
the compensation? 49 here and the 49 off campus?
They
can increase by up to 17%, but much less than that.
With that grant money, they can bring it in, and
they can do that on a year-to-year basis. Now, if
you have a teaching appointment, you can't do
that. You have to do it, you know, you have to go back
to 10 months or something like that. And once
you've made that decision, you're stuck with it
from then on. So in this department, we don't have
anybody on research. And teaching faculty that
supplement their salaries. They're all 12-month
appointees. On the extension side, we only have
about... Out of 26 or eight, I believe we have now,
here in Scattergrass, I think we only have four or
five that don't supplement their salaries. And
I'm riding a tough problem right now with an
extension faculty who's agreed, and they've been
encouraging... He's agreed to go 20% teaching and
to teach a course. But since he's done that now,
we're having trouble getting permission for him
to supplement his salary. And that means he's
volunteered to do something over and beyond and
foster what we're trying to do. And it looks like if
we can't get it worked out, he's going to be
penalized for it. Another thing, there is such a
thing as longevity pay for agency people. So if you
have somebody that's 100% either T-A-E-S or
T-A-E-X, and they go on a teaching appointment,
they lose their longevity pay. And if somebody's
been around 20 years, that's pretty significant
amount of money. So there are a lot of things like
that that you manipulate between the agencies and
all that... And the university that just really
creates some real bad hardships. And inequities
in the way you do things. Alright, in these
last two decades, would you get evaluated both as a
faculty member and a separate evaluation by the
Experiment Station and or Extension Service? Or
is it all one? No, the evaluation's right here,
because this person has an university
appointment, Experiment Station appointment,
and Extension Service. Okay. Okay. And this
person has an Extension Service appointment. So
yours went primarily through the college to the
dean to the academic. Yeah, I don't have a 100%
teaching appointment, but I did. I was the only
person in the department with a 100% teaching
appointment. 100% university appointment.
Okay. Alright, now normally I'd be asking this
question near the end of the interview, but while
we're on this topic, do you have any
recommendation as to how this very complex matter
could be handled better in the future?
I guess I don't understand enough about the
political machinations to do it, but
hopefully. See, if we just get the state
legislature to treat the agencies that are
associated with educational entities in the same
way the educational entity is treated. Okay. In
terms of the law, it would be a huge plus for us. I
think the tendency for more joint appointments,
Extension is, Dr. Heiler really emphasized do it
together, do it together. Extension has
historically been very separate from the other
two functions here. He's pulling the human
resources group together. He's pulling the
accounting group together. Okay. But there is,
somebody said, only some retirements
from this. And still, even at this point, even as
department head and associate head for Extension
sits right there in the office next to me, and we
have an excellent relationship. I depend on the
guy tremendously. But I also have an associate
head, an interim associate head for research. The
relationship between me and the associate head
for research is very different. He's
more, he more functions autonomously than the
other. And in two or three of the, in some of the
other major departments in agriculture, the
situation would be similar, would it? Oh, sure.
Yeah. And there are a few departments that don't
have Extension, especially Sedona. Very few
would have as many as we do. All right. We're
looking now in general at the 80s and 90s, those two
decades. Okay. During that period, the
department leveled off in number and, or did it
continue to grow? Yeah. No. Well, a whole lot of
things happened. In 1976, fall of 76, the
Department of Horticultural Sciences split from
this department. I mean, it was taken from this
department. Right. In the early 80s, the old
Department of Plant and Agricultural Sciences
split. The old Department of Plant Pathology and
Physiology had broken up. And then a Department of
Plant Pathology and Microbiology was formed. The
geneticists in that department went several
directions, but we took some of them. The plant
physiologists went to several different
departments, and we got some of those. So, we
inherited faculty in the 80s. I can't remember
exactly what year that'd be in the late 80s, I
guess. We certainly have to run games here. It had
to be in the middle 80s. So, we lost a group in the
mid-70s. We were
hiring at a fast enough pace then that probably,
I'd say, faculty numbers just very momentarily
low, decreased probably, and student numbers
were, well, undergraduate student numbers
peaked about 1970. Oh, yeah. 1977 in our
department. They dropped throughout the 80s.
They've been a very slow increase, but not more
than a 20% variation over quite a long time.
Graduate enrollment has been dropping now for
about five or six years for a lot of reasons, I
think. You know, it's been hard to maintain it in
the university as a whole. Funding, for one thing.
International. I don't think the Republican
Congress has been particularly good for that. I
don't think it's been particularly good for
international
development funds or funds that go into the
international military that have a tendency to
come back to us in the form of students. So, we lost
19 international students between two fall
semesters in numbers, went from 70 to 51
international graduate students between two
fall semesters. I think it's 96, 97, something
like that. And I think it's just a funding problem.
Yeah. Yeah. Primarily that was a reduction in
federal funding. Yeah. Well, it'd be reduction in
federal funding that would go to a foreign country
and then funnel back here in their education.
Okay. Okay. That kind of thing. That's my read on
it. It's the only way I don't see it. to. So, I think
it's been a lot harder. I think it's been a lot
harder. I think it's been a lot harder. I think it's
been a lot harder. I think it's been a lot harder. I
think it's been a lot harder. I think it's been a lot
harder. It's been a lot harder. So, we've had that.
And faculty numbers have gone down.
the college. At the university level I think they
use a 5% factor, and that's more than what any of our
colleges produce. We waving up – I was staying in
college then,
the
Kerry Valleyaczego level. And then, baseball –
it's hard to justify it. And then we lost over
there. Okay.
But we lost about $7,000-$8,000
of support dollars for teaching. So see, we lost,
as a department, we lost more than the college
lost. So it was going to other departments where
the enrollment's gone up more. You mentioned
international students. How did you face the
international enrollment through your years
here? About how many and from what countries?
Well, it's been several years since I did it, but
one year, I picked two or three three-year
periods, and we were graduating students from 25
to 30 different countries over a three-year
period. Primarily what parts of the world? Well,
Latin America's probably been our major.
Usually. Well, until Mainland China started
releasing students several years ago, whenever
that was. Ten years ago, I guess, or twelve. Of
course, we have more students from Mainland China
than any other single country. Mexico would
probably be second. Now, are these, as far as you
know, who's paying the bill for these Mainland
Chinese? Oh, we are. Okay. And where are they going
after they finish their degree? Staying in the
U.S. of A. That's right. I don't know. I don't know
how many we've graduated now, but I'm not sure that
any that we've graduated from Ph.D. level have
gone back home. As far as you are aware, what kind of
academic quality do these Chinese students have?
Exceptional. Hard-working. Yeah. They may be
hard to understand, but they have much larger
vocabulary than most Texans do. That's right.
That's right. That's right. That's right. That's
right. That's right. They can outscore us every
day of the week on the TOEFL. They're exceptional.
Now, we observe more and more in a faculty setting
that they present some real challenges in
management. Just cultural. Describe. Well,
stubborn. Just out and out stubborn to the point
of, they play like they don't hear more than that.
Stubborn. They don't listen. Stubborn.
Stubborn. Stubborn.
Stubborn. Very insistant. And not, I
don't
know how to say this. Many of them aren't. Many of
them. Some are service oriented. They're not.
They're not, as a general rule, not terribly
materialistic. Mmhm.
But really pushy and a tendency to,
I don't say they have a chip on their shoulder of But
always feeling there's a way to do it that would,
quote, benefit their operation. Their
operation's a little special. It has a little more
needs than somebody else's operation. I'll just
give you an example from today. I got an email thing
going on about some probes. A faculty member we
lost went to the University of Georgia. He left
these probes in a freezer upstairs. Well, we have a
new colleague who's Asian background, who's
working in some of the same area. Well, he has need
for those probes, and the probes are property of
this department. I mean, they were developed
here.
We don't have a list of what each one of those things
is, and they're worthless without it. Well, the
fellow who left is, I mean, all these guys are kind
of, they're afraid somebody's going to get
something that they won't get credit for or
something of that sort. So he emailed back. The
fellow's trying to get the probes. They said,
well, somebody had them, but she said, well, she
didn't have authority to release, and it goes on
and on. Anyway, the fellow in Georgia emailed back
and said, as soon as I get this agreement about not
releasing the thing, as soon as I get the original
signed agreement and the faxed one that you're
going to send me, I'll release it. So our fellow
emails back and says, and the faxed one I
understand was mailed yesterday. If I must sign
the original one, I can send it by mail. So the other
email comes back two hours later. Yes, I said I
wanted to release it. Well, you know, the guy said
he needed the original signed one. Why push it? I
mean, it's just like trying to create a little, you
know, controversy, but it's not it. And treatment
sometimes with subordinates is not, and I mean,
there are people all across that don't do that
right. But I've had a little problem in that area
before. Do these Chinese students, by and large,
pass the word on to fellow countrymen to come here?
How do those particular students happen to come
here? What connection is there? What's the
connection between A&M and China? Oh, ask them. I
think they may email 200 people. They'll email
every name they can possibly get as a place to go.
I'm not sure how many we've had come here because
they know something about Texas A&M
specifically. Now, it is true that any number of
our faculty visited in China. So, you know, there
are, and I know Larry Wildings had one or two
students come work with him, that were the contact
was the state. I know it was established in China.
But in many cases, I get anywhere from three to six
inquiries a day where I have a feeling that email
went to 200 people. But is it primarily a
communication from a Chinese student that's here
back to them? That I don't know. I was wondering,
it's not a faculty member from here to there. No, I
don't think so. No, it could be. I mean, there are
exchanges going on. They're going on all the time.
So some of that could be occurring I'm not aware of.
I mean, more like Larry's, he's had at least two
students come just because of the contact. But
I'll tell you what I've actually seen. Through
this door, right out here, this fall, at least 50
and maybe 75 students, mainly from India, maybe
Pakistan, graduate students at Texas A&M,
looking for assistantships. And they're in
engineering or computer science. Engineering
lost all those dollars. And they have been losing
them. So they admit these students with no
financial aid. Now, a student has to prove, you
know, they have to prove they can support
themselves here before they let them come over
here. But, you know, any enterprising student,
they want to be self-supporting as soon as
possible. So they're going out hustling the
money. I've seen a one-page, printout that is
distributed in India telling students how to do
it. Get admitted to Texas A&M. Go from department
to department. Locate assistantships. And many
of them get them, too. They actually line them up.
But I'll bet we've had at least 75 come here. And
Carol, the administrative assistant next door,
go tell them, there's nothing. They can't take
that. If I know where it's open, they'll be over
here. How many of these international students
are getting assistantships or other kind of aid
that otherwise would have gone to an American
national? Very few. You can't find the American
national anywhere close to the capabilities
these kids have. Oh, okay. All right. I mean, we're
talking GREs, 14, 1500, hopeful, 600, 30, 40. I
mean, they're superior. All right. We're about to
finish this take. And you can't find that. You
can't find that. they used to? the corporations
are? Yeah. The job situations. Yeah, I think
that's true. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And I
think it's gonna get better in the future. Yeah, I
think it's true. So private industry and of all
sorts? And our enrollment's low. the
undergraduate level in relation to the . . . Is that
true nationally? Yup. So that A&M is not unusual in
. . . Well, I mean, we can beat . . . a domestic student
finishes any land grant institution, any land
grant institution, with a 3.5, it can score
several students. It can get to a good grade. Yeah.
11 or 1200 on the GRE, they can literally go
anywhere they want to go. I mean we've had them in
here, we had an Oklahoma State fellow in here and
recruited him. I mean it's hard if we try to recruit
a faculty member. What kind of? What might y'all
offer him? Well, our standard assistantship rate
would be $16,000 this year for a Ph.D. and $14,000
for a master's. There's even a little tuition pool
that we can offer from now and a few faculty will
supplement even that out of something else. Is
that competitive nationally as far as you know? I
think so. It certainly is if you consider the
health insurance benefit.